# Styling

The Scaffold is set up to generate a CSS file `index.css` from the SCSS entry point `src/css/index.scss`.

There are intentionally few existing styles, instead a few defaults are included. Though the Scaffold supports the full gamut of SCSS, by convention we aim to write SCSS in a way that is close to standard CSS.

## Conventions
- use minimal nesting, to keep specificity low and readability/maintainability high
- use classNames as much as possible, to keep specificity low
- use a BEM methodology for class naming
- use CSS variables not SCSS variables, for easier debugging and interop with JavaScript and DOM
- use mixins sparingly, they can generate a lot of repeat CSS
- use flexbox for layout, CSS Grid is not included in our browser support matrix

## Structure
SCSS partials are organised by type

- abstracts
  - constants - the fundamental design tokens of the UI
  - functions - SCSS helper functions
  - mixins - SCSS mixins
- base
  - grid - the base grid system with utility grid classes
  - normalise - for normalising browser default styles
  - typefaces
  - typescale  
- components - the basic blocks of the UI
- vendor - thrid party styles

## CSS variables

The fundamental tokens of the user interface should be defined in `src/css/abstracts/_constants.scss`. These should include
- colours
- vertical and horizontal spacing (baseline and gutter)
- typefaces
- typographic scale


## Grid
Our current browser support list does not include CSS Grid support, instead the Scaffold grid system is implemented using flexbox.

The grid system is based on constants defined in the `src/css/abstracts/_constants.scss` file. By default a 12 column grid with 24px horizontal spacing, and 1.5rem vertical spacing.

Breakpoints and their corresponding classNames are defined by the $mq-breakpoints and $grid-names variables.

There are two ways to use the grid system
- use the classNames generated in `src/css/base/_grid.scss`
- use the column calculation helper function

### Grid classNames
A `.grid` containing element will provide negative margins and flex-wrapping for a multi-row grid.

A `'row` element will provide negative margins and a single row grid.

Each child element should have a `.col` className to indicate that it should be a column, with one or more column size classNames to indicate width at different breakpoints.

Based on the default 12 column grid, 1 column will be 1/12th of the width of the containing element, 12 columns the full width.

#### Examples
Single row, with two element, full screen on small screens, two-up at the medium breakpoint and up
```
<div class="row">
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6"></div>
</div>
```

Multiple rows, elements full screen on small screens, two-up at the medium breakpoint, three-up at the large breakpoint and up
```
<div class="row">
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
    <div class="col xs-12 md-6 lg-4"></div>
</div>
```
### Column calcultion function
Grid classNames are generated using the column calculation function. The same function can be used to get accurate grid widths for any custom class.

The function is a SCSS function which accepts the number of columns and horizontal spacing (defaulting to the gutter constant) as arguments. 

#### Example
Push an element to the right by 2 columns and set the width to fill the rest.
```
.inset {
    margin-left: column-calc(2);
    width: column-calc(10);
}
```


### Optimisation

Grid CSS generated by the loop in `src/css/base/_grid.scss` may be too much code for some UIs, or create a lot of unused classes. In such circumstances the code that generates the classNames can be deleted, and any classNames used manually added to the grid partial.



## PostCSS
The Scaffold uses PostCSS to post-process compiled CSS to add language features to support legacy browsers. In particular

- autoprefixer - adds vendor prefixes to CSS rules
- postcss-custom-properties - adds fallback rules for browsers that do not support CSS variables

Post-processing is based on the supported browser list defined in `.browserslistrc`. 



## Next
[JavaScript ⟶](./javascript.md)